docs: update IA (#7364)
apollographql/router: docs/source/routing/get-started.mdx

---
title: Apollo Router Quickstart

> subtitle: Run a router binary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subtitle: Run the router locally
```

description: This quickstart tutorial walks you through installing an Apollo Router binary, running it with an example supergraph schema and a YAML configuration file, and making test queries with Apollo Sandbox.
---

import ElasticNotice from "../../shared/elastic-notice.mdx";

> Hello! Let's run Apollo Router for the first time, using the simple scenario of developing and deploying locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hello! Let's run Apollo Router for the first time, using the simple scenario of developing locally.
```
We're not helping them deploy here so I would just leave that out

In this guide, you will:

> - Download and install a router binary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Download and run the router as a binary.
```
I wouldn't use the word "install" here as they're not installing anything. You're just downloading the router as a binary and running it locally. Would replace "install" with "run" everywhere here

> - Download a supergraph schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create a supergraph schema.
```
Even if we start help them make their supergraph schema via download, can we use the word "create" here? I think it's more aligned with how we want the user to think about these things

- Create a router YAML configuration file.
- Run the router in development mode.
- Make a query to the running router.

> ## 1. Install router binary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 1. Download the router
```

> Let's start by downloading and installing a router binary locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's start by downloading and running the router locally.
```

> 1. Download and install the latest version of the router binary with a single command line:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Download the latest version of the router binary with a single command line:
```

    ```bash showLineNumbers=false
    curl -sSL https://router.apollo.dev/download/nix/latest | sh
    ```

    <ExpansionPanel title="Download a specific router version">

    To download and install a specific version of router, set the version in the download URL path.

> 

Reviewer 2: Until we fix spacing in `<ExpansionPanel>`s, We need to include `<br>s` to avoid squishy text
<img width="768" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9717c580-6a70-4883-a53f-682a5a552a63" />

    For example, to download router v2.0.0:

    ```bash showLineNumbers=false
    curl -sSL https://router.apollo.dev/download/nix/v2.0.0 | sh
    ```

    </ExpansionPanel>

    Optionally, go to [router releases](https://github.com/apollographql/router/releases) in GitHub to download and extract a bundle.

> 1. Check that your router installed successfully by running the `router` binary from your project's root directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Check that your router downloaded successfully by running the `router` binary from your project's root directory:
```

    ```bash showLineNumbers=false
    ./router --version
    ```

> ## 2. Download supergraph schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 2. Create a supergraph schema
```

> A router needs a schema for the federated graph, or _supergraph_, that it's orchestrating. This guide uses an example supergraph schema, which you download and provide to the router.

Reviewer: Can we rephrase this to something more like this? I think this needs more context about the 3 config pieces that Router needs to start up, and we need to describe why the supergraph schema is important and what exactly it does for folks.

Router needs 3 pieces of configuration to start up:
1. supergraph schema – the supergraph schema tells router _everything_ it needs to know to effectively route your queries. this is a graphql schema annotated with federation directives
2. router config – this yaml file tells router what it needs to know about header propagation, error handling, what subgraphs to route to, etc.
3. entitlement – this tells router what plan you're on and therefore what features you have access to

> A router needs a schema for the federated graph, or "supergraph", that it's orchestrating. For this guide, we're downloading an example supergraph schema, which we'll provide to the router when running it.

Reviewer 2: Conventionally we've used italics for key terms. Additionally, beyond the opening "Let's", you've used the second person. Try:

```suggestion
A router needs a schema for the federated graph, or _supergraph_, that it's orchestrating. This guide includes an example supergraph schema you can download and provide to the router.
```

Author: ```suggestion
A router needs a schema for the federated graph, or _supergraph_, that it's orchestrating. This guide uses an example supergraph schema, which you download and provide to the router.
```

> 1. From your project's root directory, run the following to download and save a supergraph schema to a file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. From your project's root directory, run the following to download and save an example supergraph schema:
```

  ```bash showLineNumbers=false

>   curl -sSL https://supergraph.demo.starstuff.dev/ > supergraph-schema.graphql

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  curl -sSL https://supergraph.demo.starstuff.dev/ > supergraph.graphql
```

>   curl -sSL https://supergraph.demo.starstuff.dev/ > supergraph-schema.graphql

Reviewer 2: Consider using an ecomm supergraph schema to align to other quickstarts.

  ```

> <ExpansionPanel title="Content of supergraph schema">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<ExpansionPanel title="Example supergraph schema contents">
```

```graphql title="supergraph-schema.graphql"
schema
  @link(url: "https://specs.apollo.dev/link/v1.0")
  @link(url: "https://specs.apollo.dev/join/v0.3", for: EXECUTION) {
  query: Query
  mutation: Mutation
}

directive @join__enumValue(graph: join__Graph!) repeatable on ENUM_VALUE

directive @join__field(
  graph: join__Graph
  requires: join__FieldSet
  provides: join__FieldSet
  type: String
  external: Boolean
  override: String
  usedOverridden: Boolean
) repeatable on FIELD_DEFINITION | INPUT_FIELD_DEFINITION

> directive @join__graph(name: String!, url: String!) on ENUM_VALUE

Reviewer: Do we need to use an example that's this complicated here? Could we pick a simpler one so it feels less scary to first-time users?

Author: Follow up https://apollographql.atlassian.net/browse/DOC-457

  price: Int
    @join__field(graph: INVENTORY, external: true)
    @join__field(graph: PRODUCTS)
  inStock: Boolean @join__field(graph: INVENTORY)
  shippingEstimate: Int @join__field(graph: INVENTORY, requires: "price weight")
  name: String @join__field(graph: PRODUCTS)
  reviews: [Review] @join__field(graph: REVIEWS)
  reviewsForAuthor(authorID: ID!): [Review] @join__field(graph: REVIEWS)
}

type Query
  @join__type(graph: ACCOUNTS)
  @join__type(graph: INVENTORY)
  @join__type(graph: PRODUCTS)
  @join__type(graph: REVIEWS) {
  me: User @join__field(graph: ACCOUNTS)
  recommendedProducts: [Product] @join__field(graph: ACCOUNTS)
  topProducts(first: Int = 5): [Product] @join__field(graph: PRODUCTS)
}

type Review @join__type(graph: REVIEWS, key: "id") {
  id: ID!
  body: String
  author: User @join__field(graph: REVIEWS, provides: "username")
  product: Product
}

type User
  @join__type(graph: ACCOUNTS, key: "id")
  @join__type(graph: REVIEWS, key: "id") {
  id: ID!
  name: String @join__field(graph: ACCOUNTS)
  username: String
    @join__field(graph: ACCOUNTS)
    @join__field(graph: REVIEWS, external: true)
  reviews: [Review] @join__field(graph: REVIEWS)
}
```

> </ExpansionPanel>

Reviewer: Before this section is over, can we describe a bit about what a supergraph schema is and how you make one? This isn't a simple thing, it's generated code and the output of composition, so I think it would be helpful to describe that you'd need to run composition to get an artifact like this somewhere here so folks know how these things come about

Author: Add link to supergraph schema Fed description

Follow up https://apollographql.atlassian.net/browse/DOC-457

> ## 3. Create and edit YAML configuration file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 3. Create a router config
```

The router's many features are configurable via a YAML configuration file. You set your options declaratively in YAML, then point your router to it at startup.

Let's customize a common setting: the router's _supergraph listen address_. It's the network address and port on which the router receives client requests. By default the address is `127.0.0.1:4000`. As an exercise, let's change the port to `5555`.

> 1. Create a file named `router.yaml`. Open it for editing.

Reviewer 2: Consider explicitly stating where users should create this.  (At the root of the same dir they've been working in?)

Author: ```suggestion
1. In your same working directory, create a file named `router.yaml`. Open it for editing.
```

> Let's customize a common setting: the router's _supergraph listen address_. It's the network address and port on which the router receives client requests. By default the address is `127.0.0.1:4000`. As an exercise, let's change the port to `5555`.
> 
> 1. In your same working directory, create a file named `router.yaml`. Open it for editing.
> 1. Add the following configuration that sets `supergraph.listen` to `127.0.0.1:5555`:
> 
>   ```yaml title="router.yaml"
>   supergraph:
>     listen: 127.0.0.1:5555
>   ```

Reviewer: I think this is a little too simple. Let's add something more complex?

```suggestion
In your project's root directory, create a new `router.yaml` file with the following contents:

  ```yaml title="router.yaml"
  supergraph:
    listen: 127.0.0.1:5555
   XXXXXX
/// Add subgraphs, headers, errors for good starter boilerplate
  ```
```

## 4. Run the router

> When you're developing with the router locally, it's useful to run the router in _dev mode_. Dev mode is a collection of settings that make router development and debugging easier.

Reviewer: I'd delete this sentence, feels redundant with the next

> Let's run the router in dev mode. We'll also use both the supergraph schema and YAML configuration files you saved: 

Reviewer 2: The we/you in the same sentence feels a little distracting, but it could just be me.

Author: ```suggestion
Let's run the router in dev mode, using both the supergraph schema and YAML configuration files you created: 
```

1. Run the router with these command-line options:
    - `--dev` enables dev mode
    - `--config` provides the path to your YAML configuration file

>     - `--supergraph` provides the path to your supergraph schema

Reviewer: Is running with `--dev` now preferable to running `rover dev`, out of curiosity?

Can we briefly describe what running with `--dev` will do precisely, in one of those expandable drawers?

Author: add expansion panel

    ```sh showLineNumbers=false

>     ./router --dev --supergraph supergraph-schema.graphql --config router.yaml

Reviewer 2: Consider using the flags in the same order as you list/describe them.

Author: ```suggestion
    ./router --dev --config router.yaml --supergraph supergraph-schema.graphql
```

>     ./router --dev --config router.yaml --supergraph supergraph-schema.graphql

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ./router --dev --config router.yaml --supergraph supergraph.graphql
```

    2025-04-25T21:54:06.010232Z INFO  Health check exposed at http://127.0.0.1:8088/health
    2025-04-25T21:54:06.010717Z WARN  Connector debugging is enabled, this may expose sensitive information.
    2025-04-25T21:54:06.405064Z INFO  GraphQL endpoint exposed at http://127.0.0.1:5555/ 🚀
    2025-04-25T21:54:06.405628Z INFO  You're using some "experimental" features of the Apollo Router (those which have their configuration prefixed by "experimental_").
    We may make breaking changes in future releases. To help us design the stable version we need your feedback.
    Here is a list of links where you can give your opinion:

        - experimental_response_trace_id: https://github.com/apollographql/router/discussions/2147

    For more information about launch stages, please see the documentation here: https://www.apollographql.com/docs/resources/product-launch-stages/
    2025-04-25T21:54:06.406568Z INFO  state machine transitioned event="UpdateSchema(<redacted>)" state=Running previous_state="Startup"
    2025-04-25T21:54:06.406591Z INFO  state machine transitioned event="NoMoreConfiguration" state=Running previous_state="Running"
    ```

    </ExpansionPanel>

> ## 5. Make a query

Reviewer 2: Consider using "request" to clarify that queries are not the only GraphQL operation types

```suggestion
## 5. Test a request
```

Author: Prefer leaving it, as this is specifically making only a query
